Paper: Keeping your Jupyter notebook code quality bar high (and production ready) with Ploomber (#688)
scipy-conference/scipy_proceedings: papers/ido_michael/index.rst

:author: Ido Michael
:email: ido@ploomber.io
:institution: Ploomber

Keeping your Jupyter notebook code quality bar high (and production ready) with Ploomber
========================================================================================

This paper walks through this `interactive tutorial <https://github.com/idomic/ploomber-workshop>`_.
It is highly recommended running this interactively so it's easier to follow and see the results in real-time.
There's a binder link in there as well, so you can launch it instantly.

1. Introduction
---------------

Notebooks are an excellent environment for data exploration: they allow
us to write code interactively and get visual feedback, providing an
unbeatable experience for understanding our data.

> However, this convenience comes at a cost: if we are not careful about

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, this convenience comes at a cost&mdash; if we are not careful about
```

adding and removing code cells, we may have an irreproducible notebook.

> Arbitrary execution order is a prevalent problem: A `recent

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Arbitrary execution order is a prevalent problem: a `recent
```

analysis <https://blog.jetbrains.com/datalore/2020/12/17/we-downloaded-10-000-000-jupyter-notebooks-from-github-this-is-what-we-learned/>`_
found that about 36% of notebooks on GitHub did not execute in linear
order. To ensure our notebooks run, we must continuously test them to
catch these problems.

A second notable problem is the size of notebooks: the more cells we
have, the more difficult it is to debug since there are more variables
and code involved.

Software engineers typically break down projects into multiple steps and
test continuously to prevent broken and unmaintainable code. However,

> applying these ideas for data analysis requires extra work: multiple

Reviewer: ```suggestion
applying these ideas for data analysis requires extra work&mdash;multiple
```

notebooks imply we have to ensure the output from one stage becomes the
input for the next one. Furthermore, we can no longer press “Run all
cells” in Jupyter to test our analysis from start to finish.

**Ploomber provides all the necessary tools to build multi-stage,
reproducible pipelines in Jupyter that feel like a single notebook.**
Users can easily break down their analysis into multiple notebooks and
execute them all with a single command.

2. Refactoring a legacy notebook
--------------------------------

If you already have a python project in a single notebook, you can use our tool
`Soorgeon <https://github.com/ploomber/soorgeon>`__ to automatically
refactor it into a `Ploomber <https://github.com/ploomber/ploomber>`__

> pipeline. Soorgeon statically analyze your code, clean up unnecessary imports,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pipeline. Soorgeon statically analyzes your code, cleans up unnecessary imports,
```

and makes sure your monolithic notebook is broken down into smaller components.

> It does that by scanning the markdown in the notebook and analyzing the headers,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It does that by scanning the markdown in the notebook and analyzing the headers;
```

each H2 header in our example is marking a new self-contained task. In addition,
it can transform a notebook to a single-task pipeline and then the user can split

> it into smaller tasks the way they see fit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it into smaller tasks as they see fit.
```

To refactor the notebook, we use the ``soorgeon refactor`` command:

.. code:: sh

   soorgeon refactor nb.ipynb

After running the refactor command, we can take a look at the local directory,

> and we'll see that now we have multiple python tasks which are ready for production:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After running the refactor command, we can take a look at the local directory
and see that we now have multiple python tasks that are ready for production:
```

.. code:: sh

   ls playground

We can see that we have a few new files. ``pipeline.yaml`` contains the
pipeline declaration, and ``tasks/`` contains the *stages* that Soorgeon

> identified based on our H2 Markdown headings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
identified based on our H2 Markdown headings:
```

.. code:: sh

   ls playground/tasks

One of the best ways to onboard new people and explain what each workflow is doing

> is by ploting the pipeline (note that we’re now using ``ploomber``, which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is by plotting the pipeline (note that we’re now using ``ploomber``, which
```

is the framework for developing pipelines):

.. code:: sh

   ploomber plot

> This command will generate the plot below for us, that way we can stay up to date
> with changes that are happening in our pipeline and get an immidate status of what
> task was executed or failed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command will generate the plot below for us, which will allow us to stay up to date
with changes that are happening in our pipeline and get the current status of
tasks that were executed or failed to execute.
```

> .. image:: images/pipeline-step-2.png

Reviewer: Needs a caption

Soorgeon correctly identified the *stages* in our original ``nb.ipynb``

> notebook. It even detected that the last two tasks
> (``linear-regression``, and ``random-forest-regressor`` are independent
> of each other!).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
notebook. It even detected that the last two tasks
(``linear-regression`` and ``random-forest-regressor``) are independent
of each other!
```

We can also get a summary of the pipeline with ``ploomber status``:

.. code:: sh

   cd playground
   ploomber status

> .. image:: images/status-output.png

Reviewer: Needs a caption

3. The ``pipeline.yaml`` file
-----------------------------

To develop a pipeline, users create a ``pipeline.yaml`` file and declare
the tasks and their outputs as follows:

.. code:: yaml

   tasks:
     - source: script.py
       product:
         nb: output/executed.ipynb
         data: output/data.csv

     # more tasks here...

The previous pipeline has a single task (``script.py``) and generates
two outputs: ``output/executed.ipynb`` and ``output/data.csv``. You may
be wondering why we have a notebook as an output: Ploomber converts
scripts to notebooks before execution; hence, our script is considered
the source and the notebook a byproduct of the execution. Using scripts
as sources (instead of notebooks) makes it simpler to use git. However,
this does not mean you have to give up interactive development since
Ploomber integrates with Jupyter, allowing you to edit scripts as
notebooks.

In this case, since we used ``soorgeon`` to refactor an existing
notebook, we did not have to write the ``pipeline.yaml`` file.

4. Building the pipeline
------------------------

Let’s build the pipeline (this will take ~30 seconds):

.. code:: sh

   cd playground
   ploomber build

> We can see which are the tasks that ran during this command, how long did it take,
> and what's the partial percentage of the overall pipeline execution runtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can see which tasks ran during this command, how long they took to execute,
and the contributions of each task to the overall pipeline execution runtime.
```

> .. image:: images/build-output.png

Reviewer: Needs a caption

> Navigate to ``playground/output/`` and you’ll see all the outputs: the
> executed notebooks, data files and trained model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Navigate to ``playground/output/`` and you’ll see all the outputs&mdash;the
executed notebooks, data files and trained model:
```

.. code:: sh

   ls playground/output

> .. image:: images/post-build-artifacts.png

Reviewer: Needs a caption

In this figure, we can see all of the data that was collected during the pipeline,
any artifacts that might be useful to the user, and some of the execution history
that is saved on the notebook's context.

5. Testing and quality checks
-----------------------------

** Open `tasks/train-test-split.py` as a notebook by right-clicking on it and then `Open With` -> `Notebook` and add the following code after the cell with `# noqa`:

.. code:: python

    # Sample data quality checks after loading the raw data
    # Check nulls

>     assert not df['HouseAge'].isnull().values.any()

Reviewer: Is "values" needed here (i.e., would `df['HouseAge'].isnull().any()` work)?

Author: It's not, removed it.

    # Check a specific range - no outliers
    assert df['HouseAge'].between(0,100).any()

    # Exact expected row count

>     assert len(df) == 11085

Reviewer: Consider putting this into a separate Markdown cell

** We'll do the same for `tasks/linear-regression.py`, open the file and add the tests:

.. code:: python

    # Sample tests after the notebook ran
    # Check task test input exists
    assert Path(upstream['train-test-split']['X_test']).exists()

    # Check task train input exists
    assert Path(upstream['train-test-split']['y_train']).exists()

    # Validating output type

>     assert 'pkl' in upstream['train-test-split']['X_test']

Reviewer: Consider putting this into a separate Markdown cell

Adding these snippets will allow us to validate that the data we're looking for exists

> as well as the quality we expect. For instance, in the first test we're checking

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and has the quality we expect. For instance, in the first test we're checking
```

there are no missing rows, and that the data sample we have are for houses up to 100
years old.

In the second snippet, we're checking that there are train and test inputs which

> are crucial to us before training the model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are crucial for training the model.
```

6. Maintaining the pipeline
---------------------------

Let’s look again at our pipeline plot:

.. code:: python

>    Image('playground/pipeline.png')

Reviewer: Delete?

> .. image:: images/executed-pipeline.png

Reviewer: Needs caption

The arrows in the diagram represent input/output dependencies, hence,
determine execution order. For example, the first task (``load``) loads
some data, then ``clean`` uses such data as input and process it, then
``train-test-split`` splits our dataset in training and test, finally,
we use those datasets to train a linear regression and a random forest

> regressor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The arrows in the diagram represent input/output dependencies and depict the 
execution order. For example, the first task (``load``) loads
some data, then ``clean`` uses such data as input and processes it, then
``train-test-split`` splits our dataset into training and test sets. Finally,
we use those datasets to train a linear regression and a random forest
regressor.
```

> Soorgeon extracted and declared this dependencies for us, but if we want
> to modify the existing pipeline, we need to declare such dependencies.
> Let’s see how.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Soorgeon extracted and declared the dependencies for us, but if we want
to modify the existing pipeline, we need to declare such dependencies manually.
Let’s see how.
```

We can also see that the pipeline is green, meaning all of the tasks in it have
been executed recently.

7. Adding a new task
--------------------

Let’s say we want to train another model and decide to try `Gradient
Boosting
Regressor <https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.ensemble.GradientBoostingRegressor.html#sklearn.ensemble.GradientBoostingRegressor>`__.

> First, we modify the ``pipeline.yaml`` file and add a new task:
> 
> Open ``playground/pipeline.yaml`` and add the following lines at the end

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, we modify the ``pipeline.yaml`` file and add a new task:

Open ``playground/pipeline.yaml`` and add the following lines at the end:
```

.. code:: yaml

   - source: tasks/gradient-boosting-regressor.py
     product:
       nb: output/gradient-boosting-regressor.ipynb

Now, let’s create a base file by executing ``ploomber scaffold``:

.. code:: sh

   cd playground
   ploomber scaffold

This is the output of the command:
```
Found spec at 'pipeline.yaml'
Adding /Users/ido/ploomber-workshop/
playground/tasks/
gradient-boosting-regressor.py...
Created 1 new task sources.
```

We can see it created the task sources for our new task, we just have to fill
those in right now.

Let's see how the plot looks now:

.. code:: sh

   cd playground
   ploomber plot

> .. image:: images/new-task.png

Reviewer: Needs caption

You can see that Ploomber recognizes the new file, but it does not have

> any dependency, so let’s tell Ploomber that it should execute after

Reviewer: ```suggestion
any dependencies, so let’s tell Ploomber that it should execute after
```

``train-test-split``:

Open ``playground/tasks/gradient-boosting-regressor.py`` as a notebook by right-clicking on it and then ``Open With`` -> ``Notebook``:

> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer: Consider putting this into a separate Markdown cell

.. figure:: images/lab-open-with-notebook.png
   :alt: lab-open-with-notebook

   lab-open-with-notebook

At the top of the notebook, you’ll see the following:

.. code:: python

   upstream = None

This special variable indicates which tasks should execute before the
notebook we're currently working on. In this case, we want to get

> training data so we can train our new model so we change the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
training data so we can train our new model, so we change the
```

``upstream`` variable:

.. code:: python

   upstream = ['train-test-split']

Let's generate the plot again:

.. code:: sh

   cd playground
   ploomber plot

> .. image:: images/new-task-attached.png

Reviewer: Needs a caption

Ploomber now recognizes our dependency declaration!

Open ``playground/tasks/gradient-boosting-regressor.py`` as a notebook by right-clicking on it and then ``Open With`` -> ``Notebook`` and add the following code:

> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer: Consider putting this into a separate Markdown cell

.. code:: python

   from pathlib import Path
   import pickle

   import seaborn as sns
   from sklearn.ensemble import GradientBoostingRegressor

   y_train = pickle.loads(Path(upstream['train-test-split']['y_train']).read_bytes())
   y_test = pickle.loads(Path(upstream['train-test-split']['y_test']).read_bytes())
   X_test = pickle.loads(Path(upstream['train-test-split']['X_test']).read_bytes())
   X_train = pickle.loads(Path(upstream['train-test-split']['X_train']).read_bytes())

   gbr = GradientBoostingRegressor()
   gbr.fit(X_train, y_train)

   y_pred = gbr.predict(X_test)
   sns.scatterplot(x=y_test, y=y_pred)

> 7. Incremental builds

Reviewer: ```suggestion
8. Incremental builds
```

Boosting
Regressor <https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.ensemble.GradientBoostingRegressor.html#sklearn.ensemble.GradientBoostingRegressor>`__.
First, we modify the ``pipeline.yaml`` file and add a new task:

Open ``playground/pipeline.yaml`` and add the following lines at the end

.. code:: yaml

   - source: tasks/gradient-boosting-regressor.py
     product:
       nb: output/gradient-boosting-regressor.ipynb

Now, let’s create a base file by executing ``ploomber scaffold``:

.. code:: sh

   cd playground
   ploomber scaffold

This is the output of the command:
```
Found spec at 'pipeline.yaml'
Adding /Users/ido/ploomber-workshop/playground/
tasks/
gradient-boosting-regressor.py...
Created 1 new task sources.
```

We can see it created the task sources for our new task, we just have to fill
those in right now.

Let's see how the plot looks now:

.. code:: sh

   cd playground
   ploomber plot

.. figure:: images/new-task.png
   :alt: new-task

   Now we see an independent new task

You can see that Ploomber recognizes the new file, but it does not have
any dependency, so let’s tell Ploomber that it should execute after
``train-test-split``:

> Open ``playground/tasks/gradient-boosting-regressor.py`` as a notebook by right-clicking on it and then ``Open With`` -> ``Notebook``:

Reviewer 2: Maybe put ``playground/tasks/gradient-boosting-regressor.py`` on its own line to avoid bleeding into the margin?

Reviewer 2: We can try the same approach here, too, if it works in the [other case](https://github.com/scipy-conference/scipy_proceedings/pull/688#discussion_r915477513).

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. figure:: images/lab-open-with-notebook.png
   :alt: lab-open-with-notebook

   lab-open-with-notebook

At the top of the notebook, you’ll see the following:

.. code:: python

   upstream = None

This special variable indicates which tasks should execute before the
notebook we're currently working on. In this case, we want to get
training data so we can train our new model so we change the
``upstream`` variable:

.. code:: python

   upstream = ['train-test-split']

Let's generate the plot again:

.. code:: sh

   cd playground
   ploomber plot

.. figure:: images/new-task-attached.png
   :alt: new-pipeline-task-attached

   The new task is attached to the pipeline

Ploomber now recognizes our dependency declaration!

> Open ``playground/tasks/gradient-boosting-regressor.py`` as a notebook by right-clicking on it and then ``Open With`` -> ``Notebook`` and add the following code:

Reviewer 2: <img width="417" alt="Screen Shot 2022-07-04 at 11 30 21 PM" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/4421561/177249715-160ed243-81a6-46aa-8ee8-1460f482d86c.png">

Maybe put ``playground/tasks/gradient-boosting-regressor.py`` on its own line so it doesn't run into the margin?

Reviewer 2: <img width="514" alt="Screen Shot 2022-07-07 at 12 38 24 AM" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/4421561/177699999-88319346-bb5d-4317-a645-177df7e9622e.png">

Ah, sorry, the newline didn't work like I hoped. Maybe the following will work better
```
Open

.. code:: sh

   playground/tasks/gradient-boosting-regressor.py

as a notebook by right-clicking on
```

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. code:: python

   from pathlib import Path
   import pickle

   import seaborn as sns
   from sklearn.ensemble import GradientBoostingRegressor

   y_train = pickle.loads(Path(upstream['train-test-split']['y_train']).read_bytes())
   y_test = pickle.loads(Path(upstream['train-test-split']['y_test']).read_bytes())
   X_test = pickle.loads(Path(upstream['train-test-split']['X_test']).read_bytes())

>    X_train = pickle.loads(Path(upstream['train-test-split']['X_train']).read_bytes())

Reviewer 2: This section is running off the page

<img width="423" alt="Screen Shot 2022-07-04 at 11 26 15 PM" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/4421561/177249299-4d455a3c-028c-47e0-9322-16a09d495216.png">

Something like the following _might_ work
```
   y_train = pickle.loads(
       Path(upstream['train-test-split']['y_train']).read_bytes())
   y_test = pickle.loads(
       Path(upstream['train-test-split']['y_test']).read_bytes())
   X_test = pickle.loads(
       Path(upstream['train-test-split']['X_test']).read_bytes())
   X_train = pickle.loads(
       Path(upstream['train-test-split']['X_train']).read_bytes())
```

Reviewer 2: <img width="550" alt="Screen Shot 2022-07-07 at 12 35 35 AM" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/4421561/177699382-4385b7be-f282-4a6e-b98e-52fc663b2f32.png">

Let's please try this instead, to make it more compact while also not running off the page!
```
y_train = pickle.loads(Path(
    upstream['train-test-split']['y_train']).read_bytes())
y_test = pickle.loads(Path(
    upstream['train-test-split']['y_test']).read_bytes())
X_test = pickle.loads(Path(
    upstream['train-test-split']['X_test']).read_bytes())
X_train = pickle.loads(Path(
    upstream['train-test-split']['X_train']).read_bytes())
```
